**Adaptive Machine Learning**

**Stealthy and Analysis**

**& Forosity**

**The latest eBook from**

**Advanced Optical Metrology.**

**Download for free.**

**In Industry, sector after sector is moving away from conventional production methods to additive manufacturing, a technology that has been recommended for substantial research investment.**

**Download the latest eBook to read about the applications, trends, opportunities, and challenges around this process, and how it has been adopted to different industrial sectors.**

# Ultra-Strong Comprehensive Radiation Effect Tolerance in Carbon Nanotube Electronics

Maguang Zhu, Peng Lu, Xuan Wang, Qian Chen, Huiping Zhu, Yajie Zhang, Jianshuo Zhou, Haitao Xu, Zhengsheng Han, Jianwei Han, Rui Chen, Bo Li, Li, Lian-Mao Peng, Zhiyong Zhang

# Abstract

## 1 Introduction

Benefitting from the ultrathin body, high carrier mobility, and high saturation velocity, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been demonstrated to be an excellent channel to construct ultra-scaled field-effect transistors (FETs) with high performance and low power dissipation.[2] Furthermore, CNT-based electronics can provide complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) transistors containing symmetric p- and n-type characteristics through a simple and well-compatible manufacturing process[3][3] and have been considered promising candidates for integrated circuits (ICs), which act as the physical basis of modern information technology[4][5] but are encountering development bottlenecks arising from the physics, power dissipation, and manufacturing costs.[6] Subject to the immature technologies of wafer-scale material preparation, transistor fabrication, and interconnection processes, the developing CNT electronics are thus far unable to meet the requirements of mainstream digital ICs, which contain tens of billions of transistors in one chip[7][8]. To promote the utility of CNT electronics as soon as possible, many researchers have explored some special purpose applications of CNT-based ICs that can take full advantage of CNT FEIs while avoiding the integration density requirement. As the most popular special purpose ICs, ICs radiation-hard to high-energy solar and cosmic radiation have received increasing attention with the increasing ambition of humankind to explore outer space, ranging from launching spacecrafts to establishing space stations and exploring distant celestial objects such as the Moon or Mars.

CNT FEIs and ICs have shown high radiation tolerance because of the strong C-C bonds, nanoscale cross-sections, low atomic number, and negligible substrate parasitic effect from CNT channels, and their first application in radiation-hard electronics is highly expected.[9] Furthermore, two additional advantages, i.e., energy efficiency and low-temperature stability, enable CNT transistors to further meet the strict and harsh requirements for ICs used in deep space exploration.[9] Recently, great advances in radiation-hard CNT ICs have been achieved, but these works mainly focused on the total ionizingdose (TID) effect,5,7 which is not sufficient to characterize the comprehensive radiation tolerance performance of an IC in the real space radiation environment. Compared to the TID effect, single event effects (SEEs)8 and the displacement damage (DD) effect9 are at least equally important in practical applications but are rarely studied in CNT-based transistors and ICs because they are more difficult to measure due to the challenges from the requirements on irradiation source as well as the complex circuits and electromagnetic environment. Moreover, the radiation tolerance to the TID effect increases with shrinkage of the pitch size of transistors,10 which makes the radiation tolerance to SEEs become the bottleneck of the radiation performance of ICs.11 To completely evaluate the radiation tolerance properties of CNT ICs, the comprehensive radiation effects, including TID, SEEs, and DD must be studied.

Footnote 11: [https://www.smail-journal.com](https://www.smail-journal.com)

Here, we first executed measurements of SEEs and the DD effect of CNT FEIs and ICs by using a pulse laser as the SEE irradiation source and high-energy Xe+ ions as the DD irradiation source and then presented a comprehensive radiation effect analysis of CNT electronics. Device structure optimization strategies were then proposed to improve the comprehensive radiation tolerance of CNT ICs. The CNT ICs without special irradiation reinforcement technology exhibit a comprehensive radiation tolerance, including a 1 x 104 MeVcm2 mg-1 level of the laser-equivalent threshold linear energy transfer (LET) for SEEs, 2.8 x 1013 MeV g-1 for DD and 2 Mrad (Si) for TID, which are at least four times higher than those in conventional radiation-hard ICs (100 MeVcm2 mg-1 for SEEs, 101 MeV g-1 for DD and 500 krad (Si) for TID).12 The ultrahigh intrinsic comprehensive radiation tolerance will promote the application of CNT ICs in high-energy solar and cosmic radiation environments, even in the development stage of CNT electronics.

## 2 Experimental Section

### Preparation of CNT Thin Films

Uniform initially semiconducting single-walled CNT (s-SWCNT) films were prepared by deposition. Arc-discharged CNTs were purchased from Carbon Solutions Inc. Dispersants (poly[9-(1-octyloxy)-9H-carbazole-2-7-diyl (PCz)]) were synthesized by Suzuki polydensation. A total of 100 mg AP-SWCNTs and 100 mg PCz were added to 100 mL toluene. Then, the solution was dispersed with a top-tip disperator (Sonics VC700) at 300 W for 30 min. The dispersed solution was centrifuged for 0.5 h at 50000 g to remove most metallic CNTs and insoluble materials. The upper 90% of the supernatant was collected and centrifuged for a second time for 2 h at 50000 g. Finally, we collected the upper 90% of the supernatant for fabrication of a thin film with the dip-coating method. The sorted CNT solution was diluted ten times with toluene. The Si/SiO2 substrate was immersed in the diluted solution for 72 h. The substrate was then removed from the solution, rinsed with toluene for 30 min, purged with 99.999% N2 and baked at 120 degC for 30 min in air. Finally, to reduce the influence of the polymer on the radiation hard properties of CNTs, the film was annealed in a tube furnace with a forming gas (Ar/H2: 5/1) at a temperature of 600 degC for 3 h to remove the polymer.

### Fabrication Processes

#### 2.2.1 Local Bottom Gate CNT FET

The local bottom gate window was patterned by electron beam lithography (EBL), followed by evaporation of 20 nm Pd and growth of 10 nm HfO2 through atomic layer deposition (ALD) with a standard lift-off process. Next, CNTs were solution-deposited and oxygen plasma etched for 60 s to define the channels of the CNT FEIs. The active channel region was defined by EBL, followed by oxygen plasma etching for 60 s. The top gate window was patterned through EBL, followed by growth of 10 nm HfO2 through ALD and evaporation of 20 nm Pd with a standard lift-off process. Finally, the source and drain electrodes were patterned by EBL, followed by evaporation of 0.3 nm Ti and 70 nm Pd to fabricate a p-type contact.

#### 2.2.2 Top-Gate CNT FET

Source and drain electrodes were patterned by EBL, followed by evaporation of 0.3 nm Ti and 70 nm Pd to fabricate a p-type contact. Next, the active channel region was defined by EBL, followed by oxygen plasma etching for 60 s. The top gate window was patterned through EBL, followed by growth of 10 nm HfO2 through ALD and evaporation of 20 nm Pd with a standard lift-off process. Finally, the upper interconnect was patterned by EBL, with deposition of 20/90 nm Ti/Au metal by electron beam evaporation (EBE) and a standard lift-off process.

#### 2.2.3 CNT-Based 6T SRAM

The local bottom gate window was patterned by EBL, followed by evaporation of 20 nm Pd and growth of 10 nm HfO2 through ALD with a standard lift-off process. Next, CNTs were solution-deposited and oxygen plasma etched for 60 s to define the channels of the CNT-based 6T SRAM. An interlayer dielectric was formed using poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) 200 K via EBL with a dose of 10000 uC cm-2. Finally, the upper interconnect was patterned by EBL with 20/90 nm Ti/Au metal deposited by EBE and a standard lift-off process. The CNT-based 6T SRAMs in this work were measured using a probe station with a semiconductor analyzer (Keithley 4200) in the air.

### Radiation Exposure

#### 2.3.1 SEE Pulse-Laser Irradiation

An oscilloscope with a 50 O input impedance was used to visualize and record the SEIs. The laser beam was focused using a 100x microscope objective to create a charge generation spot size of ~2 mm. Laser pulses with a wavelength of 1064 nm and a normal pulse width of 150 fs at a repetition rate of 1 kHz were used. During the SET pulsed-laser test, the CNT FETs and CNT-based SRAMs were fixed on the _x_-_y_-_z_ stage with a 0.1 mm resolution.

#### 2.3.2 Xe+ ion DD irradiation

The Xe+ ion irradiation experiment was carried out at the Heavy Ion Research Facility in Lanzhou (HIRFL) at the Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IMP-CAS). The Xe+ ion energy was modulated by employing both aluminum foils and air as degraders, and the value in Si was calibrated to be 279 MeVcm2 g-1. Tests with various ion fluences were performed at a normal angle of incidence (0deg).

#### 2.3.3 Co-60 g-Ray TID irradiation

The radiation experiments were carried out by using a Co-60 source in a vacuum. The radiation rate used for all samples was approximately 480 rad (Si)/s. The transistors' transfer characteristics were measured after each radiation exposure.

### SRIM Simulation Setup

The simulated Xe+ ion fluence in the SRIM simulation was set to 5 x 102 cm-2, while its incident angle and energy were set according to the experimental conditions. The incident location was assumed to be uniformly distributed on the Pd surface (depth 0 A). In the simulated 60 x 60 mm cross-section, the Pd gate metal electrode, HfO2 gate dielectric, CNT channel, and SiO2 substrate were included. A 2 nm-thick graphene-carbon-graphene sandwich layer, featuring a middle layer with reduced carbon atom density, was used to emulate the structure of a CNT. The default material parameters of Pd, HfO2 and SiO2 were utilized for the corresponding materials.

### Sentaurus TCAD Setup and Calibration

A schematic of the simulated device is shown in Figure S1. Supporting Information, and the geometric parameters were set according to the experimental data discussed in the previous section. The channel CNT network was emulated by a 1.1 nm-thick quasi-2D layer. Since this work focuses on p-type CNT FET analysis, hole transport was investigated in detail. To accurately calculate the CNT film carrier density, the following equations were set in the quasi-2D channel1:

\[p = 2N_{\nu}\exp\left( {-\frac{E_{x} - E_{\nu}}{kT}} \right)\]

\[N_{\nu} = \frac{\beta_{0}}{4}\sqrt{\pi kTF_{c}}\]

\[E_{c} = 0.85/d_{\text{CNT}}\]

where _d_CNT is the diameter of the CNT and is set to 1.1 nm. A modified drift-diffusion (DD) model with high field velocity saturation was used for carrier transport:

\[\mu_{\nu} = \mu_{\nu} \times \left[ \frac{1}{1 + \frac{\mu_{\nu} \times e}{\nu_{\text{sup}}}} \right\rbrack^{\frac{1}{\beta}}\]

where \(e\) is the lateral electric field, \(m\)0, is the low-field hole mobility, _v_sup is the saturation velocity and \(b\) is an empirical parameter, set to 1.4. The low-field mobility empirically captures the scattering term induced by various components of the CNT FET:

\[\mu_{\nu} = \left( \mu_{\text{CNT}}^{- 1} + \mu_{\text{0D}}^{- 1} \right)^{- 1}\]

where _m_CNT is extracted from the pristine device performance and _m_DD represents the scattering caused by DD (extracted to be 1.1 cm-Vs after 5 x 102 cm-2 Xe+ ion irradiation). Meanwhile, both the interface states and fixed charges in the dielectrics were extracted through threshold voltage shift and subthreshold performance analysis. The Pd S/D metals were modeled as ohmic contacts. Since the off-state leakage is strongly affected by surface contamination, which varies between samples and cannot be effectively calibrated, no leakage model was included in the simulations.

### Statistical Analysis

In this work, the _g_m, _I_ON/_I_OFF and gate current of 20 CNT FETs in Figure S9b-d, Supporting Information, are calculated from Figure S9a, Supporting Information. Statistical analysis was carried out using Origin 2018, Microsoft Excel software, and 3D structure diagrams with 3D max.

## 3 Physics of Radiation-Induced Electronic Failures in CNT FETs

High-energy photons (X-rays and _g_rays) and particles interact with the space environment and may deposit energy on the materials along their incident path. For CNT FETs, radiation-induced damage predominantly occurs in the CNT films, the surrounding oxide layers (gate oxide or substrate) and the gate/contact metals and may then result in temporary or permanent effects in ICs.12 Radiation-induced damage is classified into three kinds of radiation effects, as shown in Figure 1, i.e., TID, DD, and SECs.

As shown in Figure 1a, TID-induced degradation is long-term and permanent damage that starts with the ionization of atoms and then results in electron-hole (_e_-_h_) pairs in the gate oxide of the CNT FET (Figure 1b). The electrons easily escape from the gate oxide to the CNT channel, driven by the negatively biased gate (in p-FET), and the holes are then trapped in bulk defects (Figure 1c). The trapped charges induced by TID radiation may cause degradation of the carrier mobility and on-state current, increased leakage current, and a threshold voltage shift in CNT FETs.

DD is a permanent radiation effect induced by the collision of particles with the atoms of the materials in CNT FETs and may result in physical damage to the lattice of CNTs.[33] As shown in Figure 1d, the collision of particles with CNTs may displace the C atoms from their initial position and create vacancies and interstitial defects in the lattice. The displaced C atoms frequently absorb onto the tube walls. These absorbed atoms play the role of interstitials in CNT samples.[44] These defects and vacancies can create deep-level traps in the bandgap of CNTs and then cause an increase in the recombination rates and a reduction in the charge carrier lifetime (Figure 1e). As a result, the DD effect may degrade the on-state current and sub-threshold swing (SS) of CNT FETs.

SEEs in CNT FETs are temporary radiation effects caused by concentrated bursts of excess charges generated at random locations in the CNT channel and subsequently collected by the source/drain (Figure 1f).[15] As shown in the mechanism diagram in Figure 1g, the SEE response starts with the creation of _e-h_ pairs along the track of the striking particle in the CNT channel, gate oxide (HfO2), and substrate (SiO2), and is then caused by two combined effects: the radiation-sensitive volume current (Figure 1h) and the gate electric field induced by SEEs (Figure 1i). The SEE-induced transient pulse may introduce soft errors during the operation of CNT ICs (e.g., single event transients in CNT FETs and single event upsets in CNT static random-access memories (SRAMs)).

Generally, radiation-hardened ICs must be simultaneously tolerant to TID, DD, and SEEs. With scaling down of the technology node in Si ICs, the radiation tolerance to the TID effect increases while the tolerance to SEEs degrades. For example, CMOS ICs at 22 nm or a more advanced node exhibit TID tolerance as high as approximately 1 Mrad (Si).[16] and the radiation tolerance to SEEs then becomes the bottleneck of the radiation performance of ICs.[11] Although some low-dimensional semiconductors have been demonstrated to be excellent materials for building radiation-hard FETs and ICs,[7] almost all of these works focused on TID rather than SEEs owing to the great technology challenge in measuring SEEs.

## 4 SEE Measurements in CNT Electronics

FETs and GT SRAM cells are fabricated through a well-developed doping-free process on solution-derived randomly oriented CNT thin films with a semiconducting purity higher than 99.99% (see the details of the fabrication process in the Experimental Section). Two kinds of gate structures, including a local bottom gate and a top gate (Figure S1, Supporting Information), are used in CNT FETs to satisfy the different irradiation

Figure 1: Radiation damage mechanisms (TID, DD, and SEEs) in CNT FETs and ICs. a) Schematic of the TID degradation mechanism of a CNT FET. b) TID-induced e-h pairs generated in the oxide. c) TID-induced holes trapped at the interface. d) Schematic of the DD degradation mechanism of a CNT FET. e) DD in a CNT FET can affect carrier recombination, trapping, and concentration. f) Typical single event transient current of a CNT FET. g) Schematic of the SEE degradation mechanism of a CNT FET. h) Schematic of the radiation-sensitive channel volume current induced by SEEs. i) Schematic of the gate electric field induced by SEEs.

sources used in this work. In particular, local bottom-gate FETs and ICs are necessary to measure SEEs using pulse-laser testing technology.

Although SEEs in outer space (especially the single event transient and single event upset effects) are usually caused by heavy ion irradiation, directly testing the SEEs of ICs induced by heavy ions is a major challenge due to the complex electromagnetic environment in an accelerator. Pulse-laser testing has become a valuable method to study SEEs in transistors and ICs since recent developments in terms of a laser dosimeter approach and numerical methods suggest that a quantitative correlation between the pulse laser and heavy charge deposition is possible.[18] Therefore, we choose a pulse laser to test the SEEs in CNT FETs and ICs (see the experimental setup in Figure 2a and the test details in the Experimental Section). Since the bandgap (typically 0.78 eV by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurement, as shown in Figure S2, Supporting Information) of CNTs in the channel is smaller than the photon energy of the laser (1064 nm, ~1.2 eV), a single event charge can be generated in the CNT films through single photon absorption (SPA). Local bottom gate CNT FETs (see the structural diagram in Figure 2b and transfer curve in Figure S3, Supporting Information) are used as the device under test (DUT) to ensure that the laser completely reaches the surface of the CNT channel. It is worth mentioning that although the SEE measurements are carried out in local bottom-gate CNT FETs, the results are still available to top-gate FETs owing to the superior penetration of high-energy particles. As shown in Figure 2c, the transient source-drain current (\(I_{\text{ds}}\)) curves are monitored by irradiating the single event-sensitive region with different laser energies (see the details to find the sensitive region in Figure S4, Supporting Information). A peak current appears in the transient \(I_{\text{ds}}\) curves as the laser pulse energy increases to 5.2 nJ per pulse, which is quantified as the threshold laser energy for single event transients (SETs) in CNT FETs. Beyond the threshold laser energy, the pulse laser begins to excite SET behavior, indicated by a peak current, which increases with the laser pulse energy. Note that the transient current peak in Figure 2c exhibits a short tail of approximately 3 ns, which is much smaller than that in a Si FinFET (appropriately 70 ns).[19] The short tail in the transient current mainly originates from the high carrier mobility of CNTs, which promotes the diffusion of the charges induced by SETs, and indicates the low SET response of CNT FETs. We further explore

Figure 2.: SEEs in CNT FETs. a) Simplified block diagram of the SPA test setup. In the figure, L represents a lens. M represents a mirror, S represents a shutter, P represents a polarizer, and BS represents a beam splitter. b) Schematic of a local bottom gate CNT FET exposed to a 1064 nm laser to test the SET effects. The CNT FET presents a channel length/width of 1 μm/10 μm and is measured under a bias condition of \(V_{\text{ds}}\) = – V and \(V_{\text{gs}}\) = 0 V. c) SETs of a CNT FET when irradiating the single event-sensitive region with different laser energies. d) Threshold SET energy for CNT FETs with different channel lengths.

how the channel length of CNT FETs affects the threshold laser energy for SETs, as shown in Figure 2d. The threshold laser energy for SETs decreases with decreasing channel length, which is similar to that in Si FETs.[11] Although these results imply that the SET response of CNT FETs may increase as the channel length scales down, the threshold energy of 3.8 nJ per pulse in 0.18 mm channel length CNT FETs is still much higher than that in 0.18 mm Si MOSFETs (0.0985 nJ per pulse).[20]

As another SEE apart from SETs to be concerned with for electronic systems used in spacecraft, a single event upset (SEU) can also make electronic systems fail either by causing false logic functionality or scrambling storage values. Although SEU tolerance is very important for radiation-hard ICs, it is still no study on the SEU effects in CNT ICs. To explore the radiation tolerance to SEUs of CNT ICs, we fabricate 6T SRAM cells consisting of p-type CNT FETs with a local bottom gate structure (see the schematic in Figure 3a and equivalent circuit in Figure 3b) and execute SEU measurements through a pulse-laser test. The transfer characteristics of CNT SRAMs can be seen in Figure S5, Supporting Information. Before the SEU test, CNT SRAMs are biased to the write state, and the logic value "1" or "0" is written. Then, we monitor the transient

Figure 3.: SEEs in CNT SRAMs. a) Schematic of a local bottom gate CNT SRAM being exposed to a 1064 nm laser to test the SEU effects. b) Equivalent circuit diagram of the CNT SRAM. c) SEU effect for the CNT SRAM being exposed to a 1064 nm laser at P1. d) SEU effect for the CNT SRAM being exposed to a 1064 nm laser at P2. e) Simulated SET current of a 180 nm PDSOI FET and a CNT network FET. f) Threshold laser energy for SETs in CNT FETs with different gate oxide thicknesses.

voltage transfer curves (_V_Q or _V_Q) at node 2 or node 1 to record the SEU signals in an SRAM cell by irradiating a pulse laser on the most sensitive transistor (PI or P2, respectively). When the laser pulse energy increases to the threshold laser energy for a SEU, a voltage peak appears in the transient _V_Q curve, as shown in Figure 3c,d. The measured threshold laser energy for SEUs in SRAM is 5.2 nJ per pulse, which is strictly consistent with the threshold laser energy for SETS measured in CNT FEIs with a similar gate length. Different from the SET response of an individual FET, there are two transient voltage peaks induced by one effective pulse in the SEU measurement of SRAM, and the second transient voltage peak is higher than the first one. In an SRAM cell, the logic data are stored in the two back-to-back inverters consisting of transistors P1-P4, as shown in Figure 3b. Once a SEE causes one of the nodes (node 1 or 2 in Figure 3b) in the inverter to flip, the disturbance may propagate forward through the inverter with a gain higher than 1 and cause a transient with an increased amplitude on the other node. As evidence, the time difference between the two peaks is approximately 1 ns (0.95 ns in Figure 3c and 1.06 ns in Figure 3d), which is equal to the gate propagation time of the CNT network-based inverter with a similar (1 mm) gate length.21 As a result, a positive feedback effect appears and causes both nodes to flip to a wrong value,21 which means that an SEU occurs in the SRAM. However, the CNT SRAM must be recovered to the right state by the bitline retained in write mode during our measurements, and then, only two peaks, rather than a series of peaks, are observed in the transient voltage transfer curves for one SEU. If transistor P2 is struck by an effective pulse laser, then the first SEU transient voltage peak in _V_Q is negative, as shown in Figure 3d, since the induced signal is out-of-phase amplified by the inverter consisting of PI and P3.

The pulse laser has proven to be an available and powerful tool for studying SEEs,22 however, the measured threshold laser energy must be converted to an equivalent LET, which is the standard parameter to benchmark SEEs in the real space environment. In dosimetry, LET is the average radiation energy deposited per unit path length along the track of an ionizing particle, which largely determines the consequence of SEE radiation.23 Here, we analyze the laser energy deposited on CNT devices and use the laser effective energy equivalent LET (ELET) model (referring to the Si-based devices)22,24 to estimate the ELET from the pulse-laser energy (the details are given in the Supplementary Information). According to the measured threshold laser energy values (5.2 nJ per pulse for the SRAM in Figure 3c and 3.8 nJ per pulse for the CNT FFT in Figure 2d), the estimated ELET is approximately \(1.49 \times 10^{4}\) MeVcm2 mg-1 in 1 mm CNT FEIs and SRAMs and declines to \(1.08 \times 10^{4}\) MeVcm2 mg-1 in 0.18 mm CNT FFTs and ICs. Therefore, CNT FETs and ICs exhibit ELETS ~2 orders of magnitude higher than Si-based FETs and ICs,24 indicating that CNT electronics present great potential for radiation hard properties with respect to SEEs.

The mechanisms of SEEs in an FET can be explained as two correlated effects: 1) the radiation-sensitive volume and 2) the gate electric field induced by SEEs (Figure S6a, Supporting Information).25 For Si-based devices (bulk Si, fully depleted silicon on insulator (FDSOI) or FinFET) with a large sensitive channel volume, the SEE response is mainly caused by the first mechanism. In CNT FETs with ultrathin channels and nanoscale cross sections, the SEE-sensitive channel volume is almost negligible. Therefore, the SEE response in CNT FETs mainly originates from the second mechanism, which is much more difficult to achieve than the first SEE mechanism in the conventional bulk semiconductor. As a result, CNT electronics exhibit much better SEE radiation hard properties than Si-based electronics. TCAD simulations, which can decouple these two mechanisms, 26,27,28,29,26,27,28,29,26,29,27,28,29,28,29,29,29,27,28,performance degradations in CNT FETs (Figure 4c). Both the \(\text{I}_{\text{0N}}\)/\(\text{I}_{\text{OFF}}\) and SS degrade with increasing Xe\({}^{+}\) fluence, with a significant nonlinear correlation (Figure 4d). The \(1\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) Xe\({}^{+}\) radiation leads to little degradation of \(I_{\text{0N}}\)/\(I_{\text{OFF}}\) and SS, indicating that the CNT FETs remain intact. However, the \(5\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) Xe\({}^{+}\) radiation causes significant degradation of the \(I_{\text{0N}}\)/\(I_{\text{OFF}}\) ratio (towers it by over 1000 times) and SS (increases it by 330 mV dec\({}^{-}\)), which indicates electronic failure in CNT FETs owing to a significant trap generation process in the dielectrics.[29] The statistical test results of 20 CNT FETs (Figure S9, Supporting Information) further confirm that \(1\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) Xe\({}^{+}\) radiation induces negligible degradation, while \(5\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) Xe\({}^{+}\) radiation causes electronic failure. Interestingly, Xe\({}^{+}\) ion irradiation has little impact on the gate leakage current (Figure S9d, Supporting Information), indicating that the DD effect does not form a leakage path in the HfO\({}_{2}\) gate dielectric. As a widely used key parameter, the DD dose (\(D_{\text{d}}\)) is employed more to benchmark the CNT FET DD tolerance.[28] The \(10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) Xe\({}^{+}\) ion irradiation can induce a \(D_{\text{d}}\) of \(2.79\times 10^{13}\) MeV g\({}^{-1}\), which is significantly (\(>\)10\({}^{2}\)) higher than the radiation tolerance requirement for outer space exploration missions.[64]

We further reveal the mechanism of the DD effect in CNT FETs through Monte Carlo simulations (see the details of the

Figure 4.: DD radiation effects in radiation-hard CNT FETs. a) False-coloured SEM image of an as-fabricated top-gated CNT FET. b) The statistical study on the ratio of the D peak intensity to the C peak intensity (ID/IG) with different heavy-ion fluences. Raman spectra of top-gated CNT FETs before and after Xe\({}^{+}\) heavy-ion irradiation with different ion fluences excited by a 785 nm laser. c) Transfer characteristics of CNT FETs with different heavy ion fluences. d) \(I_{\text{0N}}\)/\(I_{\text{OFF}}\) and SS degradation trends in CNT FETs after irradiation with various Xe\({}^{+}\) fluences. e) Simulation results of the radiation-induced vacancy distribution in the channel region. f) Vacancy densities in the depth direction. g) Simulated transfer characteristics of CNT FETs before and after \(5\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\)Xe\({}^{+}\) ion irradiation. h) Performance predictions of CNT FETs with various HfO\({}_{2}\) dielectric thicknesses after \(5\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\)Xe\({}^{+}\) ion irradiation.

SRIM simulation in the Materials and Methods). Simulation results (Figure 4e and Figure S10a, Supporting Information) reflect that the damage to a transistor is approximately uniformly distributed in the CNT film and substrate, which indicates that neither the HfO2 gate dielectric nor the Pd gate metal has a shielding effect on the heavy ions. Meanwhile, few vacancies form in the CNT film (Figure 4f and Figure S10b, Supporting Information), confirming the robustness of CNTs to DD radiation, consistent with the Raman test results (Figure 4b and Figure S8, Supporting Information). Although a high concentration of vacancies appears in the gate metal, they may be shielded by the high-density electrons in the metal and do not affect the electrical properties of the CNT channel. Therefore, the gate oxide is identified as the most vulnerable component in CNT FETs, and its damage will provide a major contribution to device failure. Then, scaling _t_m can effectively reduce the radiation-sensitive volume and improve the DD tolerance. We also simulate the DD hardening effect of CNT FETs through TCAD simulation tools (see the details of the TCAD setup and calibration in the Experimental Section).30 and the simulated transfer curves (Figure 4g) present good agreement (error <10%) with the experimental data. As shown in Figure 4h, _t_m scaling can also be utilized as an effective improvement method for DD hardening.

## 6 Comprehensive Radiation Effects in CNT Electronics

Although in this work we have respectively shown that CNT FET and CNT-based ICs have excellent radiation harden properties to SEEs and DD, there are multiple radiation effects combined (DD, TID and SEE) in the real space environment at the same time which may cause more severe comprehensive radiation damage to electronic systems. Here for the first time, we fabricate radiation-hard CNT FETs and CNT SRAMs by thinking the gate oxide thickness to 8 nm and then investigate the comprehensive radiation effects, including SEEs, DD, and TID. As shown in **Figure 5**a, the CNT FETs and SRAMs are exposed to Xe\({}^{+}\) DD radiation, \(t\)2YB TID radiation (Figure S11, Supporting Information), and a 1064 nm pulsed laser for SEEs in turn. Since defects induced by DD and trapped charges induced by TID will remain in FETs and then influence the following SEE response measurement,30 this experimental method can be used to emulate radiation effects on CNT-based ICs in the real space environment.

The transfer characteristics of CNT FETs and SRAMs with different Xe\({}^{+}\) fluences and TIDs are shown in Figure S12a-d, Figure 5b, and Figure S12e, Supporting Information, present the SEEs of CNT FETs and SRAMs after being exposed

Figure 5: Comprehensive radiation effects in rad-hard CNT FETs and SRAMs. a) Schematic diagram of the experimental method to test the comprehensive radiation effects of CNT FETs and ICs. b) SETs of a CNT FET after being exposed to Xe\({}^{+}\) and \(t\)2YB irradiation. c) Comparisons of the radiation hardness properties of reported advanced technology devices with those of our CNT FETs and ICs. d) Benchmarking of the comprehensive radiation hardness properties of 0.18 μm CNT FETs with those of reported rad-hard SI MOS FETs.

to \(1\times 10^{12}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) Xe\({}^{+}\) DD and 2 Mrad (Si) TID radiation. The threshold pulse laser energies for the SET response in CNT FETs and the SEU response in CNT SRAMs do not change with the DD and TID radiation. Although the full width at half maximum of SEIs in CNT FETs slightly increases after exposure to DD and TID, the SET peak current can still be restored to 0 for =500 ps. This is because the defects caused by DD and the trap charge introduced by TID can reduce the \(g_{\text{m}}\) of CNT FETs, which may reduce the SEE diffusion current. These results demonstrate that the CNT ICs used in this work can withstand DD up to \(2.79\times 10^{13}\) MeV g\({}^{-1}\), TID up to 2 Mrad (Si), and SEEs up to \(1.78\times 10^{4}\) MeV\({}^{-2}\) mg\({}^{-1}\) simultaneously.

We benchmark the radiation tolerance of CNT ICs in this work with that of other radiation-hard FETs[31], such as reported CNT FETs[34, 21], 2D materials[33], metal oxide thin films[35] and Si FinFETs[30, 35] based on important metrics involving TID, DD influences and the SET threshold energy, as shown in Figure 5c. Compared with previously reported FETs, the CNT FETs in this work can withstand a higher threshold laser energy for SEEs and a higher heavy ion energy for DD. Although some reported works show higher radiation tolerance than this work (e.g., 15 Mrad TID for the ion gel CNT FET or \(1\times 10^{14}\) cm\({}^{-2}\) He\({}^{+}\) for the MoS\({}_{2}\) FET), they only tested a single radiation effect. In addition, considering that the radiation hard properties of devices depend on the channel length to some extent, we compare the comprehensive radiation hard properties of 0.18 mm CNT FETs with those of 0.18 mm Si FEIs, as shown in Figure 5d. Note that Si-based FETs require different radiation hardening methods for different irradiation effects, so we choose different reported works to compare the radiation tolerance[34, 36, 30, 20]. Compared with radiation-hard Si FEIs, CNT FETs with similar gate lengths lead by more than one magnitude in DD dose, TID, and LET for SEEs, indicating the huge advantage for radiation-hard or harsh environment electronics.

## 7 Conclusion

In this work, we systematically demonstrate that CNT electronics are a promising radiation hard technology for outer space exploration. We thoroughly test and analyze the SEE, DD, and TID tolerance of CNT FETs and ICs and estimate their comprehensive radiation effect tolerance. By using a pulse laser as the SEE irradiation source, 2225 MeV Xe\({}^{+}\) as the DD irradiation source, and Co-60 \(\gamma\)ray as the TID irradiation source to simulate the radiation environment in space, rad-hard CNT ICs are tested and exhibit a radiation tolerance level of up to 2 Mrad (Si) for TID, \(2.8\times 10^{13}\) MeV g\({}^{-1}\) for DD and threshold LET = 10\({}^{4}\) MeV\({}^{-2}\) mg\({}^{-1}\) for SEEs, which are far beyond the radiation tolerance requirements for outer space exploration (500 krad (Si) for TID, 10\({}^{11}\) MeV/g for DD and 100 MeVcm\({}^{2}\) mg\({}^{-1}\) for SEEs). Moreover, these levels of radiation tolerance for different radiation effects can be realized on CNT FETs at the same time without special irradiation reinforcement technology. This work showcases CNT-based ICs as a promising radiation-hard technology for application in space exploration and nuclear industry.

## Supporting Information

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

## References

* [1] M. Z. P.L. and X. W. contributed equally to this work. This work is supported by the Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (Grant No. Z1910000070901-3). Natural Science Foundation of China (J21A6004,62225101, 61874135 and 6187032253), and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2021M/00203).
* [2] Conflict of Interest
* [3] The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## References

* [1] A. M. M. Shulaker, G. Hills, N. Patil, H. Wei, H. Chen, H. S. P. Wong, S. Mitra, _Nature_**2013**, 501, 526; b) L. Liu, J. Han, L. Xu, J. Zhou, C. Zhao, S. Ding, H. Shi, M. Xiao, L. Ding, Z. Ma, _Science_**2020**, 568, 550; c) D. Zhong, Z. Zhang, L. Ding, J. Han, M. Xiao, J. Si, L. Xu, C. Qiu, L.-M. Peng, Nat. Electron. **2018**, 1, 40; d) C. Qiu, F. Liu, L. Xu, B. Deng, M. Xiao, J. Si, L. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Guo, _Science_**2018**, 361, 387.
* [2] Y. Yang, L. Ding, J. Han, Z. Zhang, L.-M. Peng, _ACS Nano_**2017**, 1, 4124.
* [3] C. Hills, C. Lau, A. Wright, S. Fuller, M. D. Bishop, T. Srimani, P. Kaniaya, R. Ho, A. Amer, Y. Stein, _Nature_**2019**, 572, 595.
* [4] M. D. Bishop, G. Hills, T. Srimani, C. Lau, D. Murphy, S. Fuller, J. Humes, A. Ratkovich, M. Nelson, M. M. Shulaker, _Nat. Electron._**2020**, 3, 492.
* [5] a) M. Zhu, H. Xiao, G. Yan, P. Sun, J. Jiang, Z. Cui, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, L.-M. Peng, _Nat. Electron._**2020**, 3, 622; b) M. Zhu, J. Zhou, P. Sun, L.-M. Peng, Z. Zhang, _ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces_**2021**, 13, 47756.
* [6] a) N. R. Council, _NASA Space Technology Roadmaps and Priorities: Restoring NASA's Technological Edge and Paving the Way for a New Era in Space_, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C **2012**; b) H. Barnaby, _IEEE Trans Nucl Sci_**2006**, 53, 3103; c) C. Hafer, J. Mabra, D. Slocum, T. Kalkur, presented at _2006 IEEE Aerospace Conf._, 2006; d) M. Meyrappan, J. E. Koehne, J.-W. Han, _MRS Bull._**2005**, 40, 822.
* [7] P. S. Karhnaya, A. Yu, R. Netzer, W. Kemp, D. Doyle, M. M. Shulaker, _ACS Nano_**2021**, 15, 17310.

* [8] F. W. Sexton, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2003**, 50, 603.
* [9] J. Srour, C. J. Marshall, P. W. Marshall, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci_**2003**, 50, 653.
* [10] D. M. Fleetwood, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2017**, 65, 1465.
* [11] J. Benedetto, P. Eaton, D. Mavis, M. Gadlage, T. Turflinger, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2006**, 53, 3462.
* [12] J. Prinzie, F. M. Simanjuntak, P. Leroux, T. Prodromakis, _Not. Electron._**2021**, 4, 243.
* [13] B. W. Smith, D. E. Luzzi, presented at _AIP Conference Proc._, **1999**.
* [14] A. Krasheninnikov, K. Nordlund, _J. Appl. Phys._**2010**, 107, 071301.
* [15] S. P. Buchner, F. Muller, V. Pouget, D. P. McMorrow, _IEEE Trans Nucl Sci_**2013**, 60, 1852.
* [16] R. M. Brewer, E. X. Zhang, M. Gorchichko, P. F. Wang, J. Cox, S. L. Moran, D. R. Ball, B. D. Sterawski, D. M. Fleetwood, R. D. Schrimpf, _IEEE Trans Nucl Sci_**2021**, 68, 677.
* [17] T. Vogl, K. Sripathy, A. Sharma, P. Reddy, J. Sullivan, J. R. Machacek, L. Zhang, F. Karouta, B. C. Buchler, M. W. Doherty, _Nat. Commun._**2019**, 10, 1202.
* [18] V. Pouget, H. Lupayade, P. Fouillat, D. Lewis, S. Buchner, _Microelectron. Reliab._**2001**, 41, 1513.
* [19] F. El-Mamouni, E. Zhang, N. Pate, N. Hooten, R. Schrimpf, R. Reed, K. Callaway, D. McMorrow, J. Warner, E. Simoen, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2018**, 55, 2563.
* [20] B. Jin-Shun, Z. Chuan-Bin, G. Lin-Chun, L. Gang, L. Jia-Jun, H. Zheng-Sheng, _Chin. Phys. B_**2014**, 23, 088505.
* [21] Y. Xie, Z. Zhang, D. Zhong, L. Peng, _Nano Res._**2019**, 12, 1810.
* [22] T. Karnik, P. Hazucha, _IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput._**2004**, 1, 128.
* [23] J. M. Hales, A. Khachatrian, S. Buchner, N. J-H. Roche, J. Warner, Z. E. Fleetwood, A. Lieforsque, J. D. Cressler, V. Ferlet-Cavrois, D. Mcmorrow, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2018**, 65, 1745.
* [24] K. Aditya, C. K. Jha, S. Basra, H. Jatana, A. Duitt, _IEEE Trans. Electron Devices_**2018**, 65, 4826.
* [25] J. Kim, J.-S. Lee, J.-W. Han, M. Meyrappan, _IEEE Electron Device Lett._**2018**, 39, 1840.
* [26] J.-W. Han, J. Kim, D.-I. Moon, J.-S. Lee, M. Meyrappan, _IEEE Electron Device Lett._**2019**, 40, 494.
* [27] M. Zhu, J. Zhou, P. Sun, L.-M. Peng, Z. Zhang, _ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces_**2021**, 13, 47756.
* [28] J. a. Srour, J. Palko, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2013**, 60, 1740.
* [29] J. R. Schwank, M. R. Shanyefelt, D. M. Fleetwood, J. A. Felix, P. E. Dodd, P. Paillet, V. Ferlet-Cavrois, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2008**, 55, 1833.
* [30] L. Xu, C. Qiu, L.-m. Peng, Z. Zhang, _Nano Res._**2021**, 14, 976.
* [31] H. Gong, K. Ni, E. X. Zhang, A. L. Sternberg, J. A. Kozub, K. L. Ryder, R. F. Keller, L. D. Ryder, S. M. Weiss, R. A. Weller, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2017**, 65, 296.
* [32] J. M. G. Zhu, Z. Zhang, L. M. Peng, _Adv. Electron. Mater._**2019**, 5, 1900313; b. M. Luo, M. Zhu, M. Wei, S. Shao, M. Robin, C. Wei, Z. Cui, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, _ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces_**2020**, 12, 49963.
* [33] A. J. Arnold, T. Shi, I. Jovanovic, S. Das, ACS _Appl. Mater. Interfaces_**2019**, 17, 8391; b C. Liang, R. Ma, K. Li, Y. Su, H. Gong, K. Ryder, P. Wang, A. Sternberg, E. Zhang, M. Alles, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2018**, 66, 384; c) C. Liang, R. Ma, Y. Su, A. O'Hara, E. Zhang, M. Alles, P. Wang, S. Zhao, S. Pantelides, S. J. Koester, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2018**, 65, 1227.
* [34] B. Park, D. Ho, C. Kwon, D. Kim, S. Y. Seo, C. Kim, M. G. Kim, _Adv. Funct. Mater._**2018**, 28, 1020271.
* [35] J. E. M. Mamouni, E. X. Zhang, R. D. Schrimpf, D. M. Fleetwood, R. A. Reed, S. Cristoloveanu, W. Xiong, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2009**, 56, 3250; b P. Paillet, M. Gallardin, V. Ferlet-Cavrois, A. Torres, O. Faynot, C. Jahan, L. Tosti, S. Cristoloveanu, _IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci._**2005**, 52, 3345.
* [36] F. Tan, D. Yang, X. An, L. Ye, L. You, X. Zhang, R. Huang, _ECS Trans._**2012**, 44, 141.
* [37] J. Liang, D. Akinwande, H.-S. P. Wong, _J. Appl. Phys._**2008**, 104, 064515.